Steps to get up and running to use Ubuntu Touch on a phone as your Daily Driver, a.k.a. Dogfooding.

For this you wlil need:-
A supported Nexus device (other devices may be maintained by the community, but for this we're using a supported device)
 * LG Nexus 4
 * Samsung Galaxy Nexus

A computer running Ubuntu 13.04 (raring), 13.10 (saucy) or 13.10. Note 14.04 is currently still in development. Other releases may also be supported to varying degrees.

== Prepare ==

Prepare your environment and the device as outlined on the Touch Install page.

See https://wiki.ubuntu.com/Touch/Install#Flashing_the_device for full details.

Once you have done the steps outlined in "Step 1 - Desktop Setup", "Step 2 - Device unlock" and "Step 3 - Initial Device Setup" you're ready to flash the device.

== Flash ==

Flash the device as outlined in the above page "Step 4 - Deploying Image to Device".

Note that in general "phablet-flash" alone is sufficient to flash the device. This will *not* wipe your /home/phablet user area. It will also retain network configuration settings.

Sometimes you may want to start clean, which will mean wiping out all your data. 

{{{
phablet-flash ubuntu-system --bootstrap
}}}

If you want to test bleeding edge images which may not have gone through automated testing then issue:-

{{{
phablet-flash ubuntu-system --channel=devel-proposed
}}}

== Post flashing tasks ==

=== Setup network ===

Ensure your laptop is connected to a wireless network and then issue:-

{{{
phablet-network
}}}

=== Setup timezone ===

System Settings -> Time & Date

=== Add google contacts ===

{{{
adb shell
sudo -u phablet -i
syncevolution --configure --keyring=no --template SyncEvolution backend=carddav syncURL=https://www.googleapis.com/.well-known/carddav username=<your google email> password=<your gmail password> consumerReady=0 target-config@google addressbook
syncevolution --configure --template "SyncEvolution Client" syncURL=local://@google consumerReady=1 username= password= google-contacts addressbook
}}}

If you have lots (more than 50) contacts then issue the following command multiple times until all your contacts are synced.

{{{
syncevolution --sync one-way-from-server Google_Contacts addressbook
}}}

=== Copy some music over ===

Mount via MTP and drag music files to the "Music" folder.
