<<Include(Touch/Menu)>>


||<tablestyle="float:right; font-size: 0.9em; width:40%; background:#F1F1ED; margin: 0 0 1em 1em;" style="padding:0.5em;"><<TableOfContents>>||

= Testing a ubuntu touch application =
== Unit Testing ==
Unit testing is a requirement for proper test-driven development. To learn how to utilize the tools Qt and the SDK make available for this, see [[https://wiki.ubuntu.com/Touch/Testing/QML|this page]].

== Functional testing ==
For functional testing you can utilize the autopilot tool. Originally developed for the testing unity, autopilot has become a useful tool for functionally testing many different types of applications; including QML! [[https://wiki.ubuntu.com/Touch/Testing/Autopilot|See this page]] for more information on how to [[https://wiki.ubuntu.com/Touch/Testing/Autopilot|get started using autopilot]].

== Community Exploratory testing ==
Interested in helping prevent regressions and ensure new features land bugfree everyday? [[https://wiki.ubuntu.com/QATeam/TouchTesting|Join us in doing manual exploratory testing]] of each new stable image.

= Testing your Ubuntu Touch Code before submission =
To test your code before submitting use phablet-tools.

(instructions as of April 2014)

== Preparation ==

These commands are to be run on the host computer (not the phone itself):


{{{#!highlight bash
# install the latest image:
ubuntu-device-flash --channel="ubuntu-touch/devel-proposed"

# NOTE: please check in which channel your last green image actually is.
# also check the exact version, use "ubuntu-device-flash -h" for the necessary flashing options.

# Disable the intro:
phablet-config edges-intro --disable

# Make image writable and reboot; only do this for testing debs,
# if only testing click packages this can be skipped:
phablet-config writable-image --ppa ppa:ci-train-ppa-service/landing-###

# Run this in another terminal window and leave it running to
# make sure display stays on for the tests:
adb shell powerd-cli display on bright
}}}

== Running Deb tests ==

Make sure you unlock the screen on your device prior to running these commands on the host:

{{{#!highlight bash
phablet-test-run -p address-book-app-autopilot address_book_app
phablet-test-run -p cordova-ubuntu-autopilot cordova_ubuntu
phablet-test-run -p dialer-app-autopilot dialer_app
phablet-test-run -p mediaplayer-app-autopilot mediaplayer_app
phablet-test-run -p messaging-app-autopilot messaging_app
phablet-test-run -p ubuntu-keyboard-autopilot ubuntu_keyboard
phablet-test-run -p ubuntu-system-settings-autopilot ubuntu_system_settings
phablet-test-run -p ubuntu-ui-toolkit-autopilot ubuntuuitoolkit
phablet-test-run -p ubuntu-html5-ui-toolkit-autopilot ubuntu_html5_ui_toolkit
phablet-test-run -p unity-webapps-qml-autopilot unity_webapps_qml
phablet-test-run -p webbrowser-app-autopilot webbrowser_app
}}}

== Running Unity8 tests on Mir ==

{{{#!highlight bash
# 1. reboot the device
# 2. wait for the device mount to settle (nautilus pops up, at that point adb connection breaks)
phablet-test-run -n -p unity8-autopilot unity8
}}}

== Running Click tests ==

{{{#!highlight bash
# For click apps, this will download the tests for all your
# preinstalled apps you can use --click for a specific package name:
phablet-click-test-setup

# Enable autopilot to reach the confined click apps, running this can
# take a few to several minutes depending on the amount of click apps installed:
phablet-config autopilot --dbus-probe enable
}}}

Note: This is not a comprehensive list of preinstalled click packages. For that list see http://people.canonical.com/~ubuntu-archive/click_packages/click_list

{{{#!highlight bash
# pulls tests                                                 # runs tests
phablet-click-test-setup --click com.ubuntu.calculator;       phablet-test-run ubuntu_calculator_app
phablet-click-test-setup --click com.ubuntu.calendar;         phablet-test-run -p address-book-service-dummy calendar_app
phablet-click-test-setup --click com.ubuntu.clock;            phablet-test-run ubuntu_clock_app
phablet-click-test-setup --click com.ubuntu.dropping-letters; phablet-test-run dropping_letters_app
phablet-click-test-setup --click com.ubuntu.filemanager;      phablet-test-run filemanager
phablet-click-test-setup --click com.ubuntu.music;            phablet-test-run music_app
phablet-click-test-setup --click com.ubuntu.notes;            phablet-test-run notes_app
phablet-click-test-setup --click com.ubuntu.terminal;         phablet-test-run ubuntu_terminal_app
phablet-click-test-setup --click com.ubuntu.weather;          phablet-test-run ubuntu_weather_app
phablet-click-test-setup --click com.ubuntu.shorts;           phablet-test-run shorts_app
phablet-click-test-setup --click com.ubuntu.gallery;          phablet-test-run gallery_app
phablet-click-test-setup --click com.ubuntu.camera;           phablet-test-run camera_app

# (on the device after finishing running all the tests)
# clean up the downloaded tests (see notes below)
rm -rf /home/phablet/autopilot

}}}

IMPORTANT NOTE: remember that after doing a phablet-click-test-setup, you are fetching some autopilot tests to the ~/autopilot directory on the device. The tests in this directory have priority over all other directories. This means that if a given click package test pulls in, for instance, unity8 autopilot tests (which most of them do), you need to remove the ~/autopilot directory to use the latest autopilot tests installed on the system.

== Running Security tests ==

{{{#!highlight bash
# (on the local machine)
bzr branch lp:ubuntu-test-cases/touch
cd touch/tests/security
./setup.sh
adb push run_test.sh /tmp/
adb push qrt_tests /tmp/qrt_tests

# (on the device)
cd /tmp/qrt_tests
# run the tests
../run_test.sh apparmor-easyprof-ubuntu
../run_test.sh check-packages
../run_test.sh click-apparmor
../run_test.sh check-ufw-kernel-requirements
../run_test.sh check-apparmor
../run_test.sh check-ufw
}}}

== Start Applications through adb ==

In almost all cases it is a good idea to also validate your work by using your phone by hand after adding your change. A convenient way for developers to do app testing is by starting them through adb. To make that convenient we are providing a cli tool, called {{{ubuntu-app-launch}}}.

Syntax:
{{{#!highlight bash
ubuntu-app-launch <DESKTOP-FILENAME>
}}}

Examples:
{{{#!highlight bash
su - phablet

ubuntu-app-launch com.ubuntu.music
ubuntu-app-launch dialer-app
}}}


== Receipts for different Developer Roles ==

For application developers, we highly recommend to run at least your own application autopilot before submitting code.
{{{#!highlight bash
# install your autopilots (example if in a package); on target:
apt-get install your-app-autopilot

# unlock screen by hand and run on target through adb:
phablet-test-run your_app
}}}

For indicator developers, we highly recommend to run at least your indicator tests, but also the unity8 test suite; also if your indicator collaborates with any application, also run their tests
{{{#!highlight bash
# install unity8 autopilot and two apps; on target:
apt-get install unity8-autopilot webbrowser-app-autopilot camera-app-autopilot

# unlock screen by hand and run on target through adb:
phablet-test-run webbrowser_app

# unlock screen by hand and run on target through adb:
phablet-test-run camera_app

# run unity8 ( remember the -n)
phablet-test-run -n unity8
}}}


For core developers, we highly recommend to run unity8, three random apps and whatever your own test suites are.
